Welcome to the huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine. Today. We are going to discuss sugar in particular how our nervous system regulates our sugar intake and are seeking of sugar. We're also going to discuss how sugar regulates our nervous system and as you'll soon, learn sugar really impacts our brain and body by two main mechanisms. Isms, one of those mechanisms is based on the Sweet Taste of sugar which itself is rewarding. Even if you're not much of a sweet tooth. I confess. I'm not most people enjoy sweet tastes more than bitter tastes and the Sweet Taste of sugar. And its various forms is strongly reinforcing. Meaning it triggers the activation of neurons nerve cells in the brain and body that make us want to consume more of that sweet substance. Incidentally. Sweet taste also make us want to eat more of other substances. Senses as well. You may be familiar with that phenomenon. Now sugar also triggers mechanisms in the brain and body based on its nutritive content independent of its sweetness. What that means is that the actual caloric content and the way that Sugar interacts with your nervous system at a subconscious level without your awareness, also impacts your craving and seeking of sugar and other Foods today. We are going to discuss what happens when you ingest sugar in terms of your body's reaction. Your brains reaction. We are also going to talk about what happens when you don't ingest enough sugar, because it turns out sugar is such a powerful fuel for the brain that under conditions, where people don't ingest enough sugar or where their so-called blood glucose, which is basically a blood sugar of a particular form gets too low there neurons, don't function as well. That said, their conditions of very low blood sugar in which neurons can function even better. So today we are going to talk about the ins and outs the ups and downs of sugar. As it relates to your nervous system and by the end of this episode, I'm confident that you have a much clearer picture as to how much sugar you should be ingesting, whether or not you should avoid sugars that you're currently eating, and you will certainly understand much more about the energy and fuel sources that your brain relies on which I'm certain, will allow you to make better informed choices about the foods, you eat, and avoid toward mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting to Live Events. This may the first live event will Hosted in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled, the brain-body contract during which I will discuss science and science based tools for mental health, physical, health, and performance. I should point out that while some of the material, I'll cover will overlap with information covered here on the huberman Lab podcast and on various social media posts. Most of the information I will cover is going to be distinct from information covered on the podcast. Or elsewhere. So once again, it's Seattle on May 17th. Portland on May 18th. You can access tickets by going to human lab.com, / tour and I hope to see you there. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, a part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme. I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is thesis thesis makes what are called? Nootropics, which means smart drugs. Now, to be honest. I am not a fan of the term nootropics. I don't believe in smart drugs. In the sense that I don't believe that there's any one substance, or collection of substances that can make us smarter. I do believe based on science. However, that there are particular, neural circuits and brain functions that allow us to be more focused, more alert access creativity, be more motivated at cetera. That's just the way that the brain works different, neural circuits for different brain States. And so the idea of a nootropic that's just going to make a Smarter all around fails to acknowledge that. Smarter is many things, right? If you're an artist or a musician, you're doing math, you're doing accounting a different part of the day. You need to be creative. These are all different brain, processes thesis understands this. And as far as I know that the first nootropics company to create targeted, nootropics for specific outcomes. They only use the highest quality ingredients, which of course is essential. Some of those I've talked about on the podcast, things like DHA, ginkgo biloba, phosphatidyl serine. They give you the ability to try several different blends over the course of a month. Discover which nootropics work best for your unique brain, chemistry and genetics and goals. And with that personalization design, a kit of nootropics that's ideal for the different brain and body States. You want to access. I've been using thesis for more than six months now and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a total Game Changer. My go-to formula is the clarity formula or sometimes I'll use their energy formula before training to get your own personalized. Nootropic starter kit. Go online to take thesis.com huberman, take a A minute quiz and thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's take thesis.com huberman and use the code huberman at checkout for 10% off. Your first order. Today's episode is also brought To Us by athletic greens now called a G1. Athletic greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral, probiotic drink. I've been taking athletic greens since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking athletic Greens in the reason. I still take out letter greens once or twice a day, is that it helps me, cover all of my bases. Nutritional needs. It makes up for any deficiencies that I might have. In addition. It has probiotics which are vital for microbiome Health. I've done a couple of episodes now on the so-called gut microbiome and the ways in which the microbiome interacts, with your immune system, with your brain to regulate mood and essentially with every biological system relevant to health throughout your brain and body without let it greens. I get the vitamins. I need the minerals. I need and the probiotics to support my microbiome. If you'd like to try out, let it greens, you can go. Two athletic greens.com huberman and claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road, plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K to our ton of data. Now showing that vitamin D3 is essential for various aspects of our brain and body Health, even if we're getting a lot of sunshine, many of us are still deficient in vitamin D3. And K2 is also important because it regulates things like cardiovascular function calcium in the body. And so on again, go to athletic greens.com hubermann. To claim the special offer of the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K to today's episode is also brought To Us by inside tracker inside trackers, a personalized nutrition platform. That analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done. For the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be assessed with a quality blood test. What's unique about inside tracker. Is that while there are a lot of different Tests out there for hormones and metabolic factors Etc with inside tracker. You get the numbers back in terms of your levels, but they also give you very clear. Directives. In terms of Lifestyle nutrition and supplementation that can help you bring those values into the ranges that are best for you and your health goals and that's very different than a lot of the other programs where you get a lot of information. We don't really know what to do with that information inside tracker makes that all very easy to understand and very actionable based on the very easy-to-use dashboard at inside tracker. If you'd like to try inside track, You can visit inside tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of inside. Trackers plans. Just use the code huberman at checkout. Okay, let's talk about sugar. Let's talk about how sugar impacts your brain and how your brain impacts your pursuit or your avoidance of sugar. Let's get a few things out of the way. First. The first thing is that there's nothing inherently bad about sugar. I know the word sugar gets a bad rap nowadays and indeed, you're going to hear over and over again. During this podcast that consuming a lot of refined sugars in particular, high fructose, corn syrup is known to have a very large number of bad effects on the brain and body. I don't know that there's any one that really debates that anymore, even if we just agree and I think we should all agree on the so-called calories in calories out principle, right? It's a principle of thermodynamics that if we ingest more energy than we burn, we are going to gain weight. If we ingest less energy than we burn, we are generally going to lose weight and if The two things are imbalance ingestion and burning of energy. Well, then we're going to maintain weight. So everyone agrees on that. I agree on that. But beyond that there are a number of ways in which particular nutrients in the case of today's episode sugar impact. The way that the brain works such that we tend to seek out more of particular nutrients. For instance. If we eat sugar, there are two or at least two mechanisms by which we will crave more sugar. I think. People are aware of that experience. But today I'm going to explain exactly how that works. But also that when we ingest sugar, it has a bunch of different effects on the way that our neural circuits work that can allow us to be more or less focused more or less agitated more or less happy more or less depressed in some cases. So today as we explore this thing. We're calling Sugar, We're Going to explore that mainly in the context of the nervous system, but also in the context of how the nervous system regulates many many. Functions and behaviors that are important to all of you, your ability to think your ability, to exercise, your ability to gain weight lose weight. Whatever your goals might happen, to be sugar, plays a critical role in achieving those goals. And in some cases, if you're ingesting too much at the wrong times of the wrong forms, sugar can actually impede those goals. In fact, sugar can prevent all the right behaviors from allowing you to achieve the goals that you want. So today we are going to place sugar into its proper context. The way I want to start. Start off by doing that is to tell you a little bit of what happens when we eat and a little bit of what the brain does to respond to those events. So what happens when we eat? Well, I've done an entire episode on metabolism. So if you're interested in the full Cascade of hormonal and neural events that occurs when we eat, please check out that episode. But for sake of today's discussion, let's just take a what I call Top Contour view of the hormonal response to ingesting food. Now, any time we eat, that is the consequence of a number of things that happen. Before we ate, there's a hormone in our brain and body called ghrelin. Spelled GH reli. N ghrelin is a hormone that increases depending on how long it's been since we ate last. Okay. So the longer it's been since we had a meal ghrelin levels are going to be higher and higher and higher and it essentially makes us hungry by interacting with particular neurons in an area of the brain called the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus.- and some other areas as well, like the lateral hypothalamus. You don't need to know the names of those brain areas. But if you'd like to know them, there they are ghrelin increases. It tends to make us hungry. And then when we eat typically, what happens is ghrelin levels, go down. So it's a very logical system. Now when we eat assuming that we eat carbohydrates, but even if we just eat some protein and some fats, we will experience a slight or in some cases, a large rise in blood. Glucose blood. Glucose is simply blood sugar and the body and brain, we should say particular the nervous system doesn't function. Well, if blood sugar is too high or too low. So as a consequence we have another hormone, which is released from the pancreas, which is called insulin which helps regulate the amount of glucose in the bloodstream. So even if you were to ingest, an entire cup and 8 ounce cup of pure table sugar, which would send your blood glucose very very high assuming that you have a normal. Insulin response that you're not diabetic that insulin response would help clamp that blood glucose level so that it did not cause damage to your brain and body. Because if blood sugar goes too high, it's actually toxic to neurons and other cells of your body can kill them off and neurons of the central nervous system in the brain and spinal cord. Once they are dead. They do not come back. So your biological systems understand this at a biological level that is and prevent that death of cells due to high blood sugar by keeping. Insulin around in order to clamp blood glucose diabetics. We call them type 1 diabetics who don't make insulin have to take insulin when they eat in particular, when they foods that raise their blood sugar specifically to avoid that neurotoxicity in the other deleterious effects of high blood sugar. Okay. So ghrelin is a hormone that goes up the longer. It's been since we've eaten it tends to stimulate hunger when we eat ghrelin is suppressed blood glucose typically goes up, especially when we a carbohydrate containing meal. When blood glucose goes up, its regulated in the body meaning its Peaks and its valleys are more less smoothed out and that glucose is sequestered. It's taken away where it needs to be taken away. And in certain locations, it's delivered to cells so that those cells can use the glucose. Now, one of the chief organs for glucose utilization is the brain neurons are tremendously metabolically active and their preferred mode of metabolism is glucose metabolism. The words neurons basically run on sugar, which is not to say that you should eat a lot of sugar as you'll see today. There are states of mind and body. For instance, fasted States in which people report having immense amounts of mental Clarity and their blood glucose is actually quite low. So it is simply not the case that the more sugar that you ingest the better that your brain will function. But it is the case that for most people, meaning people who are not on a ketogenic or very low carbohydrate diet. They're not adapted to low carbohydrate. Diets that neurons in their brain and body are using glucose in order to function. That's what allows those neurons to fire electrical, potentials. That's how we refer to it. Firing meaning, sending electrical signals down their lengths to communicate with other neurons. 